add guide for gang scheduling with RayJob and Kueue (#43062)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/cluster/kubernetes/examples/rayjob-kueue-gang-scheduling.md

only start when all required resources are available. This is crucial when working with expensive,
limited resources like GPUs.

## What's Kueue?

[Kueue](https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/) is a Kubernetes-native system that manages quotas
and how jobs consume them. Kueue decides when:
* To make a job wait
* To admit a job to start, meaning that Kubernetes creates Pods.
* To preempt a job, meaning that Kubernetes deletes active Pods.

Kueue has native support for some KubeRay APIs. Specifically, you can use Kueue
to manage resources consumed by RayJob and RayCluster. See the
[Kueue documentation](https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/docs/overview/) to learn more.

## Why use gang scheduling?

Gang scheduling is essential when working with expensive, limited hardware accelerators like GPUs.
It prevents partially provisioned Ray clusters that claim unused GPUs. With Kueue and gang scheduling,
a RayJob will remain suspended until the Kubernetes cluster and the underlying cloud provider can
guarantee the capacity needed to execute the RayJob. This greatly improves GPU utilization and cost,
especially when GPU availability is limited.

## Create a Kubernetes cluster on GKE

> Create a GKE cluster with autoscaling enabled:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a GKE cluster with `enable-autoscaling` option:
```

gcloud beta container node-pools create gpu-node-pool \
  --accelerator type=nvidia-l4,count=1,gpu-driver-version=latest \
  --enable-queued-provisioning \
  --reservation-affinity=none  \
  --zone us-west1-b \
  --cluster kuberay-gpu-cluster \
  --num-nodes 0 \
  --min-nodes 0 \
  --max-nodes 10 \
  --enable-autoscaling \
  --machine-type g2-standard-4
```

> 

Author: done

> Create a GPU node pool with the "enable-queued-provisioning" option enabled:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a GPU node pool with the `enable-queued-provisioning` option:
```

  --cluster kuberay-gpu-cluster \
  --num-nodes 0 \
  --min-nodes 0 \
  --max-nodes 10 \
  --enable-autoscaling \
  --machine-type g2-standard-4
```

> This command creates a node pool which initially has zero nodes. The `gcloud beta` command is used since some flags are still in Beta status.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command creates a node pool which initially has zero nodes. Use the `gcloud beta` command because some flags have beta status.
```

> The `--enable-queued-provisioning` flag enables "queued provisioning" in the Kubernetes node autoscaler using the ProvisioningRequest API (more details below).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `--enable-queued-provisioning` flag enables "queued provisioning" in the Kubernetes node autoscaler using the ProvisioningRequest API. More details are below.
```

## Install Kueue

Install Kueue with the ProvisioningRequest API enabled.
```
kubectl apply --server-side -f https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/releases/download/v0.6.0-rc.2/manifests-alpha-enabled.yaml
```

See [Kueue Installation](https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/docs/installation/#install-a-released-version) for more details on installing Kueue.

## Configure Kueue for gang scheduling

> Next, configure Kueue for gang scheduling. Kueue leverages the ProvisioningRequest API for two key tasks:

Author: It's (1). Kueue can initiate scale up of nodes using ProvisioningRequest. However, the difference from normal scale up is that ProvisioningRequest blocks node scale up until all resources are available at once

> The `--reservation-affinity=none` flag is required as Node Reservations in GKE aren't supported with ProvisioningRequest.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You need to use the `--reservation-affinity=none` flag because GKE doesn't support Node Reservations with ProvisioningRequest.
```

> "enable-queued-provisioning" is only available on versions 1.28+ and requires use of the `gcloud beta` command

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"enable-queued-provisioning" is only available on versions 1.28+ with the `gcloud beta` command
```

> ## Install the KubeRay Operator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Install the KubeRay operator
```

1. Dynamically adding new nodes to the cluster when more resources are needed for a job.
2. Blocking the admission of new jobs while waiting for sufficient resources to become available.

See [How ProvisioningRequest works](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/provisioningrequest#how-provisioningrequest-works) for more details.

### Create Kueue Resources

This manifest creates the following resources:
* [ClusterQueue](https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/docs/concepts/cluster_queue/): defines quotas and fair sharing rules
* [LocalQueue](https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/docs/concepts/local_queue/): a namespaced queue (belonging to a tenant) that references a ClusterQueue
* [ResourceFlavor](https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/docs/concepts/resource_flavor/): defines what resources are available in the cluster (typically from Nodes)
* [AdmissionCheck](https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/docs/concepts/admission_check/): a mechanism allowing components to influence timing of workload admission

> ```yaml

Reviewer 2: Upon further consideration, we don't need to add the YAML to the KubeRay repository if we decide to paste and explain the entire YAML in this document. Keeping the consistency between the YAML and the YAML in the doc is not easy.

> 1. Dynamically adding new nodes to the cluster when more resources are needed for a job.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Dynamically adding new nodes to the cluster when a job needs more resources.
```

> 2. Blocking the admission of new jobs while waiting for sufficient resources to become available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Blocking the admission of new jobs that are waiting for sufficient resources to become available.
```

See [How ProvisioningRequest works](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/provisioningrequest#how-provisioningrequest-works) for more details.

> ### Create Kueue Resources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Create Kueue resources
```

  name: "default-flavor"
---
apiVersion: kueue.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: AdmissionCheck
metadata:
  name: rayjob-gpu
spec:
  controllerName: kueue.x-k8s.io/provisioning-request
  parameters:
    apiGroup: kueue.x-k8s.io
    kind: ProvisioningRequestConfig
    name: rayjob-gpu-config
---
apiVersion: kueue.x-k8s.io/v1beta1

> kind: ProvisioningRequestConfig

Author: @kevin85421 yes that's correct, Kueue is always in gang mode in that it will only admit workloads when all of it's resources are available.

However, without autoscaling and provisioning request, it is up to the cluster admin to properly configure quotas in ClusterQueue to reflect the capacity available in the cluster. With autoscaling and provisioning request, gang scheduling is automatically handled and the quota can be configured to "infinity". Both approaches work and have trade-offs, for this guide I decided to use the autoscaling approach so we don't have to configure static quotas

> * [ClusterQueue](https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/docs/concepts/cluster_queue/): defines quotas and fair sharing rules

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [ClusterQueue](https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/docs/concepts/cluster_queue/): Defines quotas and fair sharing rules
```

> * [LocalQueue](https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/docs/concepts/local_queue/): a namespaced queue (belonging to a tenant) that references a ClusterQueue

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [LocalQueue](https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/docs/concepts/local_queue/): A namespaced queue, belonging to a tenant, that references a ClusterQueue
```

metadata:
  name: rayjob-gpu-config
spec:
  provisioningClassName: queued-provisioning.gke.io
  managedResources:
  - nvidia.com/gpu
---
apiVersion: kueue.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: ClusterQueue
metadata:
  name: "cluster-queue"
spec:

>   preemption:

Author: Good catch, we actually don't need preemption in this example

>   preemption:

Author: When pre-empting, yes it will set Suspend=true

> * [ResourceFlavor](https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/docs/concepts/resource_flavor/): defines what resources are available in the cluster (typically from Nodes)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [ResourceFlavor](https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/docs/concepts/resource_flavor/): Defines what resources are available in the cluster, typically from Nodes
```

> * [AdmissionCheck](https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/docs/concepts/admission_check/): a mechanism allowing components to influence timing of workload admission

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [AdmissionCheck](https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/docs/concepts/admission_check/): A mechanism allowing components to influence the timing of a workload admission
```

  name: rayjob-gpu-config
spec:
  provisioningClassName: queued-provisioning.gke.io
  managedResources:
  - nvidia.com/gpu
---
apiVersion: kueue.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: ClusterQueue
metadata:
  name: "cluster-queue"
spec:

>   namespaceSelector: {} # match all.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  namespaceSelector: {} # match all
```

  resourceGroups:
  - coveredResources: ["cpu", "memory", "nvidia.com/gpu"]
    flavors:
    - name: "default-flavor"
      resources:
      - name: "cpu"
        nominalQuota: 10000 # infinite quotas
      - name: "memory"
        nominalQuota: 10000Gi # infinite quotas
      - name: "nvidia.com/gpu"
        nominalQuota: 10000 # infinite quotas
  admissionChecks:
  - rayjob-gpu
---
apiVersion: kueue.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: LocalQueue
metadata:
  namespace: "default"
  name: "user-queue"
spec:
  clusterQueue: "cluster-queue"
```

Create the Kueue resources:
```bash
kubectl apply -f kueue-resources.yaml
```

:::{note}

> This example configures Kueue to orchestrate gang scheduling of GPUs. However, other resources such as CPU and memory can be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example configures Kueue to orchestrate the gang scheduling of GPUs. However, you can use other resources such as CPU and memory.
```

:::

## Deploy a RayJob

Download the RayJob that executes all the steps documented in [Fine-tune a PyTorch Lightning Text Classifier](https://docs.ray.io/en/master/train/examples/lightning/lightning_cola_advanced.html). The [source code](https://github.com/ray-project/kuberay/tree/master/ray-operator/config/samples/pytorch-text-classifier) is also in the KubeRay repository.

```bash
curl -LO https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ray-project/kuberay/master/ray-operator/config/samples/pytorch-text-classifier/ray-job.pytorch-distributed-training.yaml
```

Before creating the RayJob, modify the RayJob metadata with a label

> to assign the RayJob to the LocalQueue created earlier:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to assign the RayJob to the LocalQueue that you created earlier:
```

```yaml
metadata:
  generateName: pytorch-text-classifier-
  labels:
    kueue.x-k8s.io/queue-name: user-queue
```

Deploy the RayJob:
```bash
$ kubectl create -f ray-job.pytorch-distributed-training.yaml
rayjob.ray.io/dev-pytorch-text-classifier-r6d4p created
```

## Gang Scheduling with RayJob

> Here's the expected behavior when a GPU-requiring RayJob is deployed to a cluster initially lacking GPUs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Following is the expected behavior when you deploy a GPU-requiring RayJob to a cluster that initially lacks GPUs:
```

```bash
$ kubectl get rayjob pytorch-text-classifier-rj4sg -o yaml
apiVersion: ray.io/v1
kind: RayJob
metadata:
  name: pytorch-text-classifier-rj4sg
  labels:
    kueue.x-k8s.io/queue-name: user-queue
...
...
...

> status:

Author: This example was based on v1.0.0

> status:

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can update the status?

> * Kueue admits the RayJob, and its execution begins with Ray nodes scheduled on the newly provisioned nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Kueue admits the RayJob, schedules Ray nodes on the newly provisioned nodes, and the RayJob execution begins.
```

Reviewer: Does Kueue schedule the Ray nodes? If not, I need to correct this rewrite.

Author: Reworded to:
```
Kueue admits the RayJob, allowing Kubernetes to schedule the Ray nodes on the newly provisioned nodes, and the RayJob execution begins.
```

  jobDeploymentStatus: Suspended  # RayJob suspended
  jobId: pytorch-text-classifier-rj4sg-pj9hx
  jobStatus: PENDING
```

Kueue will keep this RayJob suspended until it's corresponding ProvisioningRequest is satisfied.
You can list ProvisioningRequest resources and their status:
```bash

> $ kubectl get provisioningrequest

Reviewer 2: However, when I increase the number of nodes in the `default-pool` from 1 to 2, it provisions a new node within 30 seconds.

> $ kubectl get provisioningrequest

Reviewer 2: This seems to be a bug for the beta feature `gcloud beta container node-pools create gpu-node-pool ...`.

> $ kubectl get provisioningrequest

Author: > My provisioning request has already been created for 15 minutes, but PROVISIONED is still False.

This is expected IF there's no GPU capacity. It's possible there was no GPUs at the time you created the RayJob but then some became available when you tried to manually scale the node pool. 

> Is there any way to know the progress of the provisioning process? 

I believe there is some work planned to improve the visibility of ProvisioningRequest but I'll need to follow-up with Kueue folks on it

> $ kubectl get provisioningrequest

Reviewer 2: > This is expected IF there's no GPU capacity. It's possible there was no GPUs at the time you created the RayJob but then some became available when you tried to manually scale the node pool.

You may have misunderstood my messages slightly. Let me summarize why I think it is a bug.

* `default-pool` is created by `gcloud container clusters create` (not a beta feature).
* `gpu-node-pool` is created by `gcloud beta container node-pools ...` (a beta feature).
* My provisioning request has already been created for 15 minutes, but PROVISIONED is still False.
* I tried to manually scale up the size of `gpu-node-pool` (https://github.com/ray-project/ray/pull/43062#discussion_r1491718392) from 0 to 1, but nothing happened (the GKE Web UI still shows the node pool has 0 node).
* I tried to manually scale up the size of `default-pool` from 1 to 2. The GKE Web UI shows the node pool has 2 nodes immediately before the new node is actually created.
* Hence, I expect that the web UI should change immediately when I edit it manually.

> $ kubectl get provisioningrequest

Author: > My provisioning request has already been created for 15 minutes, but PROVISIONED is still False.

PROVISIONED=False in the the ProvisioningRequest right? ProvisioningRequest does not pertain to the node pool itself, it pertains the set of nodes that will be used to run the RayJob. Provisioned=True means the nodes in the node pool have been created. 

`gpu-node-pool is created by gcloud beta container node-pools ... (a beta feature).` succeeds quickly because you create a node pool with 0 nodes.

> $ kubectl get provisioningrequest

Author: > Is there any way to know the progress of the provisioning process?

Regarding this, I spoke with @alculquicondor and he opened this issue as a follow-up https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/issues/1749

> In the event that GPUs are unavailable, Kueue will keep the RayJob suspended. In addition, the node autoscaler will avoid provisioning any new nodes unless it can fully satisfy the RayJob's GPU requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If GPUs are unavailable, Kueue keeps suspending the RayJob. In addition, the node autoscaler avoids provisioning new nodes until it can fully satisfy the RayJob's GPU requirements.
```

> Upon creating a RayJob, notice that the RayJob is immediately suspended despite the ClusterQueue having GPU quotas available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upon creating a RayJob, notice that the RayJob status is immediately `suspended` despite the ClusterQueue having GPU quotas available.
```

  jobDeploymentStatus: Suspended  # RayJob suspended
  jobId: pytorch-text-classifier-rj4sg-pj9hx
  jobStatus: PENDING
```

> Kueue will keep this RayJob suspended until it's corresponding ProvisioningRequest is satisfied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kueue keeps suspending this RayJob until its corresponding ProvisioningRequest is satisfied.
```

> You can list ProvisioningRequest resources and their status:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
List ProvisioningRequest resources and their status with this command:
```

```bash
$ kubectl get provisioningrequest
NAME                                                      ACCEPTED   PROVISIONED   FAILED   AGE
rayjob-pytorch-text-classifier-nv77q-e95ec-rayjob-gpu-1   True       False         False    22s
```

> Note there are two coloumns in the output: `ACCEPTED` and `PROVISIONED`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note the two coloumns in the output: `ACCEPTED` and `PROVISIONED`.
```

> `ACCEPTED=True` means that Kueue and the Kubernetes node autoscaler has acknowledged the request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ACCEPTED=True` means that Kueue and the Kubernetes node autoscaler have acknowledged the request.
```

`PROVISIONED=True` means that the Kubernetes node autoscaler has completed provisioning nodes.

> Once both of these conditions are true, the ProvisioningRequest is considered satisfied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once both of these conditions are true, the ProvisioningRequest is satisfied.
```

$ kubectl get nodes
NAME                                                  STATUS   ROLES    AGE   VERSION
gke-kuberay-gpu-cluster-default-pool-8d883840-fd6d    Ready    <none>   14m   v1.29.0-gke.1381000
gke-kuberay-gpu-cluster-gpu-node-pool-b176212e-g3db   Ready    <none>   46s   v1.29.0-gke.1381000
```

Once the ProvisioningRequest is satisfied, Kueue admits the RayJob.
The Kubernetes scheduler then immediately places the head and worker nodes onto the newly provisioned resources.
The ProvisioningRequest ensures a seamless Ray cluster start up, with no scheduling delays for any pods.

```bash
$ kubectl get pods
NAME                                                      READY   STATUS    RESTARTS        AGE
pytorch-text-classifier-nv77q-g6z57                       1/1     Running   0               13s
torch-text-classifier-nv77q-raycluster-gstrk-head-phnfl   1/1     Running   0               6m43s
```

> ## Why use gang scheduling?

Reviewer 2: Perhaps we should move it to the beginning of the document. "Why" is more important than "How".

Author: Good point, I'll move it
